.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii bam-rmdup.1
.\"
.TH BAM-MELD 1 "DECEMBER 2012" Applications "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
bam-meld \- meld BAM files together, keeping best alignments
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bam-meld [
.I option
.B |
.I file
.B ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bam-meld
takes multiple BAM files as input and melds them into one by keeping the
best alignment for each read.  Inputs must be in the same order with
mate pairs sorted together.  One way to achieve that is to sort by query
name, another is to keep files in their original order.


.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-o, --output file"
Send output to
.I file
instead of standard output.

.IP "-s, --sorted"
Tells
.I bam-meld
that the input files are sorted by query name.  They will be merged, and
all the records found for a given read are melded into one.  This works
even if a particular read is missing from some, but not all input files.

.IP "-u, --unsorted"
Tells
.I bam-meld
the the input is unsorted.  It is assumed to be grouped by query name
and all input files must have strictly the same order with no records
missing from any file.

.IP "-w, --weight XX:Y"
Sets the weight for the badness of field
.I XX
to value 
.I Y.
The values of all fields (with integer or floating type) are multiplied
by their weight and summed up to obtain the badness of an alignment.
The alignment with the lowest badness is chosen as the best, the
difference in badness between the two best alignments becomes a new
upper limit on the mapping quality.

.IP "--bwa"
Sets a badness scheme suitable for programs that fill in the 
.IR XM ", " XO ", and " XG
fields, e.g.
.I bwa aln.

.IP "--anfo"
Sets a badness scheme suitable for programs that fill in the 
.IR UQ " and " PQ
fields, e.g.
.I anfo.

.IP "--blast"
Sets a badness scheme suitable for programs that fill in the 
.I AS
field, e.g.
.I bwa bwasw
and presumably the
.I blast
family.

.IP "--blat"
Sets a badness scheme suitable for programs that fill in the 
.I NM
field, which would be appropriate for 
.I blat
style programs.


.SH AUTHOR
Udo Stenzel <udo_stenzel@eva.mpg.de>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR biohazard (7)

