.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii bam-rmdup.1
.\"
.TH BAM-FIXPAIR 1 "OCTOBER 2016" Applications "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
bam-fixpair \- bring read pairs together an repair them
.SH SYNOPSIS

.B bam-fixpair [
.I option
.B |
.I file
.B ... ]

.B bam-fixpair [
.I option
.B |
.I file
.B ... ] --exec [program] CLOWNS MIDDLE JOKERS

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bam-fixpair
reads one or more BAM files, brings the paired end reads together, fixes
any flags as needed, and writes the result out in BAM format again or
pipes(!) it into another program that expects two(!) FastQ files as input.

.B bam-fixpair
should work with any input, but it performs best on sorted BAM input
that hasn't been filtered in a way to make it internally inconsistent.
Performance on inconsistent BAM files suffers, but the output will
always be an internally consistent file.  Output is never sorted, but
the two mates of a pair appear next to each other.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "-o, --output file"
Send BAM output to
.IR file .
The default is to pipe uncompressed BAM to stdout.

.IP "-X, --exec"
Pipe two streams in FastQ format to a program.  This option ends the
command line for 
.B bam-fixpair
and is followed by the command line of a program to execute.  The
command line shall contain the literal words
.IR CLOWNS ", " MIDDLE " and " JOKERS
up to once each.  If present, these will be replaced with file names
that refer to pipes such that reading from
.I CLOWNS
yields the first mates,
.I JOKERS
yields the second mates of each read pair in the same order and
.I MIDDLE
yields the unpaired reads.  To avoid leaking memory, the executed
program should read from all these file descriptors in an interleaved
fashion.  When done,
.B bam-fixpair
exists with the exit code of the external program. 

.IP "-n, --dry-run, --validate"
Turns off output.  Any errors or inconsistencies found by
.B bam-fixpair
will still be reported, so it serves to validate a BAM file.

.IP "-k, --kill-widows"
Delete reads that lost their mate.  Widows typically result from well
intended filters that deal improperly with paired end data.

.IP "-u, --kill-unmapped"
Delete unmapped reads that lost their mate.  The retained widows are
flagged as unpaired to make the output valid.

.IP "--kill-none"
Do not delete reads that lost their mate.  They are flagged as unpaired
to make the output valid.  This is the default.

.IP "-v, --verbose"
Print all informational messages.  This is potentially very noisy.

.IP "-w, --warnings"
Print warnings and errors.  Warnings are emitted for minor
inconveniences like mismatches flags, errors are emitted for outright
mistakes like missing reads.  This would be a good setting when
combined with
.IR "--validate" .

.IP "--errors"
Print only errors.  Errors are emitted for outright mistakes like
missing reads.  This is the default setting.

.IP "-q, --quiet"
Print only fatal errors that prevent program continuation.  Use this if
you don't care about how badly mutilated the file is, and just want to
feed it into some program somehow.

.IP "--report-mrnm, --no-report-mrnm"
Report / don't report mismatched mate reference names.  Defaults to yes.

.IP "--report-mpos, --no-report-mpos"
Report / don't report mismatches mate position.  Defaults to yes.

.IP "--report-isize, --no-report-isize"
Report / don't report wrong insert size.  Slighly miscalculate insert
sizes are surprisingly common, so this defaults to no.

.IP "--report-flags, --no-report-flags"
Report / don't report mismatched flags.  Defaults to yes.

.IP "--report-fflag, --no-report-fflag"
Report / don't report mismatched flags that are commonly inconsistent.
This applies to flags that are so often mishandled by common software
that they are more or less expected to be inconsistent, therefore it
defaults to no.

.IP "--report-ixs, --no-report-ixs"
Report / don't report mismatched index information.  Defaults to yes.

.IP "--only-mapped"
Drop completely unmapped input.  Single reads are retained in the output
if and only if they are mapped, paired reads are retained if and only if 
.I at least one
of the two mates in a pair is mapped.  This results in consistent
output, while the attempt to achieve the same by calling
.B samtools view -F4
results in an inconsistent output.

.IP "--fix-sven QUAL"
Trim the longest suffix off each read that has an average quality below
.IR QUAL .
If that causes a read to vanish, it is removed and leaves a widow, which
is then either flagged correctly or killed, depending on the setting
mentioned above.  This option is a bad idea, don't use it.

.IP "-h, -?, --help, --usage"
Prints a short usage information and exit.

.IP "-V, --version"
Prints the version number and exits.

.SH BUGS
For large and badly messed up inputs, 
.B bam-fixpair
will run out of memory.  A possible fix would be to buffer in external
memory, and that is planned, but hasn't been done.

.SH AUTHOR
Udo Stenzel <udo_stenzel@eva.mpg.de>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR biohazard (7)

