.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii bam-rmdup.1
.\"
.TH BAM-RMDUP 1 "DECEMBER 2012" Applications "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
bam-rmdup \- remove PCR duplicates from BAM files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bam-rmdup [
.I option
.B |
.I file
.B ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bam-rmdup
searches for PCR duplicates in BAM files.  From each set of duplicates,
a consensus is formed, which replaces the whole set.  Input files must
be sorted by coordinate, all inputs will be merged into a single sorted
output file.  Finally, a summary of the number of removed duplicates and
and estimate of library complexity is printed to standard output.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-o, --output file"
Send BAM output to
.IR file .
The default is to produce no output and count duplicates only.  If 
.I file
is '-', BAM output is sent to stdout and the final tally is instead sent
to stderr.

.IP "-O, --output-lib pat"
Split output by library (see notes below) and write each into a file
with the name created from 
.IR pat .
If 
.I pat
contains the characters
.IR '%s' ,
they will be replaced by the name of the library.  Note that there can
be reads assigned to no read group, these will have the empty string
substituted.  The characters
.IR '%%'
will be replaced by a single percent sign.

.IP "-R, --refseq REF"
Specify which parts of the input to read.  Selective reading requires an
index file for the input.  It allows separate processing of individual
reference sequences and hence parallelization.  If
.IR REF " is " A ,
the whole input is processed, which is the default.  If
.I REF
is a number, only alignments to one reference sequence are processed.
If
.IR REF " is " X-Y ", where " X " and " Y
are numbers, alignments to reference sequences numbered 
.IR X " through " Y
are processed.  Reference sequences are numbered starting from
.IR 1 ,
asking for references that do not exist results in no error, but an
empty output file.  If
.IR REF " is " U ,
only reads with invalid reference sequence (unaligned reads at the end
of the file) are processed.  This only makes sense to simulate the
effect of 
.IR --unaligned ,
therefore 
.IR "--refseq U" " implies " --unaligned .

.IP "-z, --circular CHR:LEN"
Specify that the reference sequence starting with the string
.I CHR
is circular and has length 
.IR LEN .

The effect is that reads that align to one or more position that is
duplicated in the reference are normalized to a small start coordinate
and have their mapping quality (MAPQ) fixed where possible.  After removal of
duplicates, reads that overhang the end of the reference sequence are
duplicated to the beginning and invalid parts of the alignment are
masked.  The correct length is also entered in the BAM header.

Assuming that reads were mapped to a reference that has a part from the
beginning pasted to its end, a subsequent genotype caller should now see
even coverage over the whole length of the reference.  At the same time,
duplicate removal and complexity estimation should still work fine.
(Arguably, this is all way too complicated, but simple solutions seem
unattainable within the constraints of the BAM file format.)

.IP "-p, --improper-pairs"
Retain improper pairs, that is, mate-pairs of which only one mate is
mapped.  These are discarded by default.

.IP "-u, --unaligned"
Retain unaligned reads and completely unaligned pairs.  This amounts to
a simple copy operation at the end and may only be sensible in
conjunction with 
.I --keep 
if the output file is intended to replace the input file without loss of
any data.

.IP "-1, --single-read"
Treat all reads as single.  This might be a workaround for a very bad
second read, but is generally considered a bad idea.  Reads will no
longer be marked as "paired" after running with this setting.

.IP "-c, --cheap"
Run in cheap mode.  Cheap mode does not compute a consensus sequence for
a cluster of duplicates, but selects one of the reads as representative.
Its advantage is that it runs faster.  Cheap mode is the default if no
output file is specified, else a consensus is computed by default.

.IP "-k, --keep, --mark-only"
Keep duplicates and mark them as such.  Setting this option has the
effect that all reads that would have been discarded during duplicate
removal are instead retained and marked as duplicates.

Note that 
.I --keep
does not affect the operation of the filter settings!  It may make sense
to combine 
.I --keep 
with 
.IR --improper-pairs ,
it may not make sense to combine it with
.IR --min-length .

.IP "-Q, --max-qual qual"
Set the maximum quality score after consensus calling to
.I qual.
Consensus calling can result in unrealistically high quality scores due
to effects outside this program's scope (presumably errors in PCR).
Quality score are therefore limited to an upper value, even if we didn't
actually remove any duplicates.  The default is 60, corresponding to a
very high fidelity polymerase.

.IP "-l, --min-length len"
Discard reads shorter than
.IR len .
This option may conserve time if the plan is to discard short reads
later anyway.

.IP "-q, --min-mapq qual"
Discard reads with a map quality (MAPQ) lower than 
.IR qual .
If the
.IR --circular 
option is in use, the filter is applied after reads have been wrapped
and their map quality has been corrected.  This option may conserve time
if the plan is to discard short reads later anyway.  

.IP "-s, --no-strand"
Treat the strand information as uninformative.  Normally, PCR duplicates
should always map to the same strand, however, in certain types of
library (e.g. Illumina fork adapter preparation) the two strands of the
same original molecule map to different strands.  With the
.I --no-strand
option, these are considered duplicates, without it, they are distinct.

.IP "-r, --ignore-rg"
Ignore read groups.  Normally, no duplicates are expected across
different libraries, and this information is gleaned from the read group
headers.  With
.IR --ignore-rg ,
everything is treated as a single read group with duplicates potentially
everywhere.

.SH THEORY OF OPERATION

.SS Filtering Of Input

In normal operation, unaligned single reads and completely unaligned
pairs, half-aligned pairs, and duplicate reads are discarded.  The
rationale is that these will usually be dropped later anyway.  If this
loss of information is undesirable, 
.I --improper-pairs
retains half-aligned pairs and includes them in the duplicate removal
process, 
.I --unaligned
includes unaligned single reads and completely unaligned read pairs in
the output, and
.I --keep
keeps duplicates and marks them as such.  In summary, running with
.I -p -u -k 
and without any of
.I -1 -l
should retain all information from the original file.

.SS Definition of Duplicates

To find duplicates, reads are grouped into sets of equal alignment
coordinate, equal library, and equal strand.  Alignment coordinate means
the 5' coordinate and length for merged reads, the two leftmost
coordinates for read pairs, and just the leftmost coordinate for single
ended reads, the library is the one defined for the read group else the
sample specified for the read group, else the read group, else the empty
string,  The assumption here is that different libraries cannot contain
libraries.  This works best if the RG-LB field specifies the
"ur-library" before amplification.

The choice of what constitutes a duplicate is made such that a read pair
can be dealt with using only the information available at one mate's
site (
.IR POS , MPOS and FLAG
in BAM files).  This way,
.B bam-rmdup
can stream a file with no additional sorting pass, and it can be
parallized over target sequences.

For each set, a consensus is called by first determining the most common
CIGAR line and then calling the consensus of all reads that match the
CIGAR line.  Note that this means reads with a different CIGAR line are
effectively discarded, but that also makes dealing with indels rather
easy.  Quality scores are afterwards limited to a sensible maximum.  

.SS Mixed Data

In principle, BAM files can contain a mix of paired end data, single
ended data, merges pairs, and half discarded pairs.  The latter is
invalid, but surprisingly common in practice.  We try to deal with the
mess as best as we can.  The biggest difficulty arises from a mix of
single ended and paired reads, because it is is possible that a single
ended reads looks like a duplicate of two sets of pairs that are clearly
not duplicates of each other.

.B bam-rmdup
solved this problem by treating single ended and paired data mostly
separately.  If a set of single ended reads could be a duplicate of at
least one set of paired end, the singles are removed or marked, but they
are not included into any consensus.

.SH BUGS
It's way too slow.

.SH AUTHOR
Udo Stenzel <udo_stenzel@eva.mpg.de>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR biohazard (7)

