.TH COORD2ANNO "1" "Feb 2011" "coord2anno" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
coord2anno \- translate genome coordinates to annotations
.SH SYNPOSIS
.BI "coord2anno [-o " output_file "] [-O " output_pattern "] 
.BI " [-a " annotation_file " ...] [-A " legacy_annotation_file " ...]"
.BI " [-c " chromosome_file "] [\-covered|\-partial|\-inclusive|\-nearest] "
.BI " [-p " port "] [-H " host "] [-q]"
.BI "" region_file " ..."

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I coord2anno
reads one or more tables that maps genomic regions to annotations, then
reads one or more files containing regions, and annotates those regions.
Region files can be 
.SM SAM, BAM,
a simple table, or a 
.SM FASTA
file that encodes
regions in sequence identifiers; coordinates can be either 
.SM UCSC
or
.I Ensembl
style, or a mix of both.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB-o, \-output \fIoutput_file\fR"
Defines the output file.  If neither \fB\-o\fR nor \fB\-O\fR is given,
output is sent to stdout.

.IP "\fB-O, \-output-pattern \fIpattern\fR"
Defines a pattern for the construction of output file names.  One output
file is created for each input file.  The output file name is obtained
by replacing the strings \fI%p\fR in \fIpattern\fR by the path of the
input file, \fI%n\fR by its name without extension, and \fI%e\fR by its
extension.

.IP "\fB-a, \-annotation \fIannotation_file\fR"
Defines an annotation file.  Annotations must be in BED format and are
read before any other processing starts.  Multiple annotations may be
given, the union of the results is output.

.IP "\fB-A, \-legacy-annotation \fIannotation_file\fR"
Defines an annotation files just like
.BR \-annotation ,
but this file is in the legacy five column format.  Using this option
is discouraged.

.IP "\fB-c, \-chroms \fIchromosome_file\fR"
Defines the chromosome translation table.  If a translation table is
given, 
.I coord2anno
tries to translate
.I Ensembl
names into 
.SM UCSC
names, which allows input to be a mix of
.SM UCSC
and
.I Ensembl
data.  Without a translation table, either convention can be used, but
it must be used consistently.

.IP "\fB-C, \-chroms-internal \fIchromosome_table_name\fR"
Same as 
.IR \-chroms ,
but used in internal named table.  Call with an invalid name to get a
list of available tables.

.IP "\fB-s, \-nostrand\fR"
Ignore strand information in region files.  This is primarily useful
when annotating 
.SM BAM 
files, which always contain strand information, when this information
isn't actually useful.

.IP "\fB\-covered\fR"
Output only annotations that are fully contained in a region.

.IP "\fB\-partial\fR"
Output only annotations that overlap into a region, but are not fully
contained in it.

.IP "\fB\-inclusive\fR"
Output annotations that overlap a region at least partially.  This is
the default.

.IP "\fB\-nearest\fR"
Output partial and total overlaps as with
.BR \-inclusive ,
but also output the nearest annotation for each region that does not
overlap any annotation.  The (signed) distance is appended to the
annotation, separated by an '@' character.

.IP "\fB-h, \-host\fR"
Switch to client mode and and set the server host to connect to.  See
below under
.IR "client-server mode" .

.IP "\fB-p, \-port\fR"
In client mode, set the port to connect to.  Else switch to server mode
and set the port to listen on.  See below under
.IR "client-server mode" .

.IP "\fB-q, \-quiet\fR"
Operate silently, without progress reports.

.IP "\fB-h, -?, \-help, \-usage\fR"
Print a summary of command line options.

.SH "FILES"
.SS "Annotation Table"
The annotation table should be in
.SM BED
format.  For
.I coord2anno
to do anything useful, the
.SM BED
file must have at least 4 columns, since column 4 ("name") is used as
the annotation.  If the
.SM BED
file has 6 or more columns, column 6 ("strand") is used to make the
annotation strand specific.  Empty lines, lines starting with a hash
mark ('#') and track definition lines (those starting with the word
"track") are ignored.

.I coord2anno
also understands an ad-hoc five column format.  This was a bad idea and
these files should be phased out.  Therefore, they will not be
documented here.  If you were smart enough to make five column tables,
you are smart enough to turn them into
.SM BED
files even without documentation, so please do that.  In the meantime,
they can still be loaded through the 
.B \-legacy-annotation
option.


.SS "Chromosome Translation Table"
The chromosome translation table is a text file with one entry per line
and three whitespace separated columns.  The first line can optionally
be a header line starting with '#', which is ignored.  The fields
are:
.IP \[bu] 2
Ensembl 
.SM ID
(a number or an accession number)
.IP \[bu] 2
.SM UCSC ID
(chr-something)
.IP \[bu] 2
Offset minus one

The offset field is 0 for ordinary chromosomes where just the name needs
to be mapped.  To map contigs with accession numbers to chromosomes
.IR "" "(" "chr_random" " or " "chrUn" "),"
the offset is the zero-based start position in the concatenated
UCSC-style chromosome.  Note that chromosome translation is only applied
to legacy annotation files.

.SS "Region Files"
.I coord2anno 
tries to infer the format of region files automatically.  Compressed and
uncompressed
.SM BAM
files are recognized from their header.  If a file starts with a '>', it
is interpreted as
.SM FASTA.
If a file starts with an '@', or if the first line has 11 or more fields
and field 5 can be interpreted as a
.SM CIGAR 
line, it is interpreted as a
.SM SAM
file.  Anything else is read as a
.SM BED
file.

There used to be support for a custom five-column region file, which has
been dropped in favor of 
.SM BED.
If you were smart enough to generate the five-column file, you are smart
enough to convert it to 
.SM BED.
You are encouraged to do so.


.SS "FASTA File With Regions"
If a region file begins with '>', it is interpreted as a 
.SM FASTA
file where the sequence identifiers contain region information.  All
identifiers must contain at least four fields separated by colons (':').
These fields are:
.IP \[bu] 2
chromosome
.IP \[bu] 2
strand
.IP \[bu] 2
start position
.IP \[bu] 2
end position

.SS "Output Table"
The output table a text file with one entry per line and two
whitespace separated columns.  The first line starts with '#' and
contains a descriptive header.  The first column contains the region's
id, which is the complete sequence identifier if input came from
.SM FASTA
or the contents of the first column if input came from a table, the
second column contains all annotations, separated by colons (':').
Regions with no annotation at all are suppressed from the output.


.SH "NOTES"
.SS "Coordinate Systems"
Internally, 
.I coord2anno
always represents regions as zero-based, half-open intervals.  The same
convention is used in 
.SM BAM, BED, FastA
and legacy five-column files.  In contrast,
.SM SAM
uses one-based, closed intervals.

Earlier versions supported a brittle heuristic to infer the conventions
used in a particular file.  This heuristic has been dropped; please
convert your legacy files to a standard format and use the conventions
of that format.  The "chromosomes" in legacy annotation files can still
be translated from
.SM Ensembl
conventions to 
.SM UCSC
conventions by providing a translation table.  In this case, one-based,
closed intervals are translated into zero-based, half-open intervals,
and an optional offset is applied.


.SS "Regions"
In annotation files, the smaller of the two given coordinates is
interpreted as start coordinate, the greater as end coordinate.  No
inference about which strand is annotated is drawn from the relative
magnitude of the coordinates.

In input files, start coordinates must be less than or equal to end
coordinates, otherwise the region is interpreted as empty.

Note that in Ensemble style coordinates it is impossible to encode an
empty region.  In 
.SM UCSC
style coordinates, a region with equal start and end coordinates is
interpreted as empty.  No warning or error is given for empty regions,
even though they don't make much sense in the context of
.IR coord2anno .

.SS "Strands"
Both annotations and regions have an associated strand, but either may
be unknown.  If an annotation has no known strand, it is understood as
applying to both strands.  If a region has no known strand, annotations
are looked up on both strands and the union of them is reported.

The forward strand is always encoded as "+", the reverse strand is
encoded as "-", and an unknown strand is encoded as "0" or, where
appropriate, a missing field.

.SS "Client-Server Mode"
.I coord2anno
can optionally operate in a client-server mode.  In this mode, the
server effectively acts as an in-memory cache of annotations.  New
annotations can be added at any time by simply running the client,
cached annotations may automatically be evicted from the server at any
time.

The server is started by running 
.I coord2anno
with the 
.B \-port
option.  All other options except
.B \-quiet
are ignored and the server will listen for connections on the given
port.

The client is started by running
.I coord2anno
with both the
.B \-host
and the
.B \-port
options.  All other options work exactly as when running in standalone
mode.  If the server already knows about an annotation file, it will be
used as is, else the client will upload it.  Note that the set of
annotations is identified by the file name, so be careful when using
relative pathnames or shell tricks that generate annotations on the fly.


.SH "BUGS"
There is no way to report only annotations that fully contain a region.
Note that annotations fully \fIcontained\fR in a region can be reported.

The output file format is ad-hoc.  A future version of
.I coord2anno
will probably drop support for custom tables and swap in a standard
format.

Handling of regions with
.I start
greater than 
.I end
is inconsistent, but due to historical reasons this is unlikely to get
fixed.

The handling of
.I Ensembl
and 
.SM UCSC
coordinate conventions is fragile and difficult to comprehend, but
there's hardly anything we can do about it.


.SH "AUTHOR"
Written by Udo Stenzel <udo_stenzel@eva.mpg.de>.


