.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii bam-rmdup.1
.\"
.TH FASTQ2BAM 1 "OCTOBER 2014" Applications "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
fastq2bam \- convert fastq files to bam
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fastq2bam [
.I option
.B ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fastq2bam
takes FastQ or FastA files as input and converts them to BAM, honoring
various common conventions.  Paired end and singly or doubly indexed
reads are supported in most encodings encountered in the wild.

Most syntactic conventions employed in FastQ are recognized, see below.
Multiple files can be given as input, they are combined sensibly and
finally concatenated.  Bare file arguments behave the same as if they
were given with the 
.I --read-one
option.


.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-o, --output file"
Send output to
.I file
instead of standard output.  Absent
.IR -o ,
uncompressed BAM is piped to stdout.

.IP "-1, --read-one file"
Read 
.I file
and turn each contained sequence into a BAM record.  
.I file
may contain an arbitrary mix of paired and unpaired reads, first and
second mates, and so on.

.IP "-2, --read-two file"
Read
.I file
and interpret the contents as second mates of read pairs.  Each read is
paired up with one from the source previously given with
.I --read-one
(or stdin if no
.I --read-one
was encountered), and the pair is appropriately flagged a 1st mate and
2nd mate.

.IP "-I, --index-one file"
Read 
.I file
and interpret the contents as the first index sequence, which is
combined with reads from the source previously given with
.I --read-one
(or stdin if no
.I --read-one
was encountered).  

.IP "-J, --index-two file"
Read 
.I file
and interpret the contents as the second index sequence, which is
combined with reads from the source previously given with
.I --read-one
(or stdin if no
.I --read-one
was encountered).

.IP "-m, -merge-overlap[=QUAL]"
Attempt to merge or trim reads.  The optional quality is the cutoff at
which a merge/trim result is considered guaranteed correct and the
original read or read pair is discarded.

.IP "-q, --merge-qual QUAL"
Sets the quality below which merging is considered pointless.  A
merge/trim result with a lower quality is immediately discarded.

.IP "-v, --verbose"
Causes
.I fastq2bam 
to print a progress report to stderr.

.SH INPUT FILES

Input files can be FastQ or FastA, even a mix of the two,
optionally compressed using either
.IR gzip "(1) or " bgzip "(1)."
If the input is FastA, the output will not have quality scores
associated with the sequences, but nothing else changes.  Many
annotations in the header are recognized:

.IP \(bu 4 
A name suffix of "/1" or "/2" is turned into the first mate or second
mate flag, respectively (Illumina convention).

.IP \(bu 4
The name prefixes "F_" and "R_" are turned into the first mate or
second mate flag, respectively (legacy MPI EVAN convention).

.IP \(bu 4
The name prefix "M_" flags the sequence as unpaired and merged (legacy
MPI EVAN convention).

.IP \(bu 4 
The name prefix "T_" flags the sequence as unpaired and trimmed
(legacy MPI EVAN convention).

.IP \(bu 4
The name prefix of "C_", either before or after any of the other
prefixes, is turned into the extra flag 
.IR XP:i:-1 ,
meaning the result of duplicate removal with unknown duplicate count
(legacy MPI EVAN convention, I'm really sorry for this one).

.IP \(bu 4
A nucleotide sequence separated from the name by an octothorpe ("#") is
removed and treated as the first index.  Two such sequences, separated
by a comma, are treated as first and second index (legacy convention,
possibly MPI EVAN only).

.IP \(bu 4
If the first word of the description has at least four colon separated
subfields, the first is used to flag first/second mate if it has the
value 
.IR 1 or 2 ,
respectively, the second is interpreted as the "QC failed" flag if it
has the value
.IR Y ,
, and the fourth is used as the first index sequence.

If multiple files are read and combined, later files override the
appropriate values parsed from earlier files.  This makes it possible
to, e.g. have one file containing the first mates with their index
sequences, another with the second mates with their index sequences, and
a third file that supplies the second index sequence only.


.SH OUTPUT FILES

Output is BAM.  Most information is encoded in the standard fields and
flags.  In addition, the first index sequence is placed into the 
.I XI
field with string type, its quality score into the 
.I YI
field with string type, encoded just like in FastQ files.
Likewise, the second index goes into
.IR XJ and YJ .
If a read is recognized as being a replacement for a cluster of
duplicates, this is encoded by setting
.I XP
to
.I -1 
with integer type.  If a read is to be flagged as trimmed, the 
.I FF
field is set to
.I 1
, or to 
.I 2
if the read resulted from merging of a read pair (MPI EVAN convention).

.SH NOTES

Whenever multiple files are to be combined, they must run parallel, that
is, each file must contain sequences with the same read names in the
same order.

If only a
.I --read-one
argument is combined with one or two index files, the normal parsing
logic applies, so a mix of paired and unpaired reads, even with indices
is allowed.  The index sequences are overridden with those from the
separate input files.

If one 
.I --read-one
argument is combined with one
.I --read-two
argument, the pairing flags are forced.  While the normal parsing logic
still applies, a mix of paired and unpaired reads will not work as
desired and will probably lead to errors.

.SH MERGING

Merging of read pairs and trimming of single reads are considered
effectively the same.  Only few adapters occur in the wild, and we try
to trim any combination of these:
.IR "Genomic-R1" ", " "Genomic-R2" ", " "CL72" ", " "Multiplex-R2" ", " "Graft-P7" "."
Merging computes two qualities and stores them in
the bam record:  "YM" (that's Merge quality) is the odds that the merge
is wrong, "YN" (that's aNother merge quality) is the odds that any
possible merge is wrong, both are encoded on the Phred scale.

If YM is too low (less than 20, configurable with --merge-qual), nothing
is merged and the original read pair is retained.  If YM is very high
(higher that 200, configurable with --merge-overlap), the original pair
is discarded.  (At this quality, the program isn't expected to make a
single mistake in a lifetime of sequecing.)  Otherwise, the read is
merged and the original pair is retained.

Modifications are logged in the "FF" field (that's Freaking Flags):  The
value is 1 for a trimmed read, 3 for a merged read, and 4 for the
original of a read that is also present in a merged or trimmed version.

.SH AUTHOR
Udo Stenzel <udo_stenzel@eva.mpg.de>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR biohazard (7)

